Proposal for ZooKeeper to KRaft migration process (#90)
strimzi/proposals: 056-zk-kraft-migration.md

The Strimzi Cluster Operator would allow the user to drive the migration process across multiple phases in a semi-automatic procedure.

## Current situation

Currently, the Strimzi Cluster Operator supports the deployment of KRaft-based Apache Kafka clusters only from scratch.
The KRaft support is still behind a `UseKraft` feature gate which also needs the `KafkaNodePools` one to work correctly.
Through the usage of one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources, alongside the main `Kafka` one, the user is able to define pools of brokers and KRaft controllers, taking ZooKeeper out of the picture.

It is not possible to migrate a ZooKeeper-based Apache Kafka cluster to be KRaft based.
If the user has an already deployed Apache Kafka cluster using a ZooKeeper ensemble for storing metadata, the Strimzi Cluster Operator has no support to migrate the running cluster to use a pool of KRaft based controllers replacing the ZooKeeper nodes for the same purpose.

There is also no support to upgrade a KRaft-based Apache Kafka cluster to a newer version, but this missing piece is out of the scope for this proposal.

## Motivation

> The KRaft mode has been declared to be production-ready since Apache Kafka 3.3 release.

Reviewer: I would leave this out or specify by whom it was declared production-ready. Because we do not consider it production ready.

Author: This statement is in the KIP-833 (I have put the link a few lines below). This KIP was discussed and accepted by different Kafka maintainers. I could leave this out or saying "by the Apache Kafka community/maintainers". @mimaison @showuon @tombentley any opinions on this?

Reviewer 2: Yes you can add `by the Apache Kafka project` if you want to clarify

> The ZooKeeper mode has been deprecated in Apache Kafka 3.5 while providing the migration process to KRaft mode as preview.

Reviewer: Again, make it more clear that this is Kafka project only. You should probably also list the missing features ;-).

The coming Apache Kafka 3.6 release will have such a migration process supported as GA and the ZooKeeper mode will be supported until Apache Kafka 3.7 (January 2024) but removed after that.
Starting from Apache Kafka 4.0 (April 2024) only KRaft mode will be supported.

Based on the above Apache Kafka community plan, more details in [KIP-833](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-833%3A+Mark+KRaft+as+Production+Ready), the Strimzi project needs to be prepared to allow users to migrate their current cluster from running in ZooKeeper mode to KRaft mode.

## Proposal

The ZooKeeper to KRaft migration implementation is defined by [KIP-866](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration).
The upstream Apache Kafka community documentation also provides a [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) guide showing how to run the procedure manually on your cluster.

> One of the main points to highlights is that such a process doesn't support to migrate to a KRaft-based cluster running in "combined" mode:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the main points to highlight is that such a process doesn't support to migrate to a KRaft-based cluster running in "combined" mode:
```

* Cannot migrate from a ZooKeeper based configuration to having a cluster with nodes hosting both controller and broker (so actually reducing the number of nodes by removing the ZooKeeper ones).
* The migration works by having ZooKeeper nodes to be replaced by new KRaft controller nodes.
* Supporting "combined" mode is actually one of the rejected [alternatives](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration#KIP866ZooKeepertoKRaftMigration-CombinedModeMigrationSupport) in KIP-866.

It means that the user environment should be sized to host more nodes running in parallel, because during the migration process both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers will be running.
The end of the migration will involve shutting down the ZooKeeper nodes reducing the resources consumption.

TBD: some intro about Strimzi migration process

### Prerequisites

An Apache Kafka cluster is running in ZooKeeper mode with `N` brokers and `M` ZooKeeper nodes, as defined by the `replicas` fields in the corresponding `Kafka` custom resource.
The cluster has to be migrated to use `KafkaNodePool`(s) first for running the brokers (ZooKeeper nodes are never part of pools).

> Without them it’s not possible to deploy the new KRAft controllers (separated from the current Kafka brokers) as the first step of the migration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Without them it’s not possible to deploy the new KRaft controllers (separated from the current Kafka brokers) as the first step of the migration.
```

> So the prerequisite is having the Kafka cluster still using ZooKeeper but running the Kafka brokers by using `KafkaNodePool`(s).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So the prerequisite is to have the Kafka cluster still using ZooKeeper but running the Kafka brokers with `KafkaNodePool`(s).
```

The user can follow the procedure described [here](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str) in the official documentation, in order to meet this prerequisite.

> Also, the minimum Kafka version should be 3.5.0 with `inter.broker.protocol.version` set to “3.5”.

Author: I will add comment when going more into the implementation details.

> Also, the minimum Kafka version should be 3.5.0 with `inter.broker.protocol.version` set to “3.5”.

Reviewer 4: @ppatierno regarding this, I just want to highlight that there is a recent PR to disables broker startup if ZK migrations are enabled while JBOD is also enabled: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/KAFKA-15450

> Also, the minimum Kafka version should be 3.5.0 with `inter.broker.protocol.version` set to “3.5”.

Author: Well I am not sure we can rely on this because if we don't detect it earlier, we could apply ZK migration flag on brokers, rolling them and then? The brokers would not start up and keep crash looping? It would put the FSM in a bad state not so easy to recover. If we detect it early we deny the migration earlier.

> Also, the minimum Kafka version should be 3.5.0 with `inter.broker.protocol.version` set to “3.5”.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, just wanted to let you know this change in behavior.

> The user could need to upgrade the Kafka version on its own cluster before running a migration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### Migration

The migration process is semi-automatic which means having the user driving the process by interacting with the operator (mostly via annotations and custom resources creation/deletion) which is in charge to do the rest (i.e. nodes re-configuration, rolling, ...).

> NOTE: this kind of approach is already in place for the Kafka version upgrade.

Assume the following prerequisites, with a ZooKeeper based Kafka cluster defined by:

* A `Kafka` custom resource.
* One or more `KafkaNodePool`(s) for running the ZooKeeper based brokers.

It would assume the operator is not using KRaft by default nor has the `+UseKRaft` feature gate enabled.

First step for the user would be enabling the `+UseKRaft` feature gate unless it’s already enabled by default in a new operator release (depending on which Strimzi version this proposal will land).

> So it could be needed doing an upgrade of the current operator to the new release.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So the current operator may need to be upgraded to the new release.
```

> In both cases, the operator is rolled, a new one starts and it’s able to handle the creation of new Apache Kafka clusters in KRaft mode but not migrating the old ZooKeeper based ones automatically.

Reviewer: This seems weird. You first say `UseKRaft` should be disabled. And right after that you say that it should be enabled.

Author: Can you point me to the right sentences you see this? Maybe I wrote bad but I meant something different :-)
The summary is that I would expect the user doesn't have KRaft already enabled so he has to enable the FG or maybe just upgrading the operator (if this migration will land in an operator version where we don't have KRaft FG anymore but it's built-in and enabled by default).

Reviewer: It is right in the section I commented on. The first sentence sounds like a prerequisite saying you should have`+UseKRaft` disabled. And then right away you say to enable it.

Author: Ok so I think that the phrasing `It would assume the operator is not using KRaft ...` sounds like a prerequisite but it was not my intention. I will change it.

Currently, the operator prints the following warning:

```shell
io.strimzi.operator.common.model.InvalidResourceException: Tha Kafka cluster my-cluster is invalid: [At least one KafkaNodePool with the controller role and at least one replica is required when KRaft mode is enabled]
```

This is because with KRaft mode enabled in the operator, the reconciled `Kafka` resource doesn’t have any controller nodes (in any pool).

The migration process can be also rolled back to ZooKeeper at any point before taking the KRaft controllers out of the migration mode.

### Finite State Machine (FSM)

The migration process can be described with a Finite State Machine (FSM).
The operator has a new `MigrationManager` component in charge of tracking the migration finite state machine.

> Transitioning across the states depends on the current state, stored in the `Kafka.status.migrationState` field, and the "input" represented by the user interaction with the operator through the following annotations:

Reviewer: This seems like a very permanent API change for a very temporary thing.

Author: This is a good point. We could use a `strimzi.io/kraft-migration-state` annotation bringing the current state instead.

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `Kafka` custom resource with `true|false` values to start/end the overall migration process.

Author: That was an open point I had to change this annotation name. I am fine to go with `run-kraft-migration` for now.

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:
```

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Reviewer: Why does this need to be on both / all of the resources?

Author: My intention was to start an overall migration process through `Kafka` resource and then giving the user the role to drive the process on the pools, because everything is related to them. Anyway I am exploring (again) the possibility to use just `Kafka` resource. It's something I had in my first draft but abandoned to have more user involvement and less automation. I will back to my draft taking into account yours and Fede feedback.

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Author: What I was looking for the annotation on the node pools were values to set the "direction" of the migration flow more than "state"(s). I came with these three values which tbh I didn't like a lot anyway (i.e. what the user would understand about "dual"? :-) It's a kind of implementation details of the migration process itself being in a "dual write" state).
Because of having in mind steering the "direction" I didn't use what `ZkMigrationState` enums represent which are actual states. At the same time, are those values understandable to the user? (at least more than dual, zk, kraft?). Maybe documenting them we could make the meaning to be clear.

Going through their current meaning we could have:

* `pre-migration`: the Kafka meaning is controllers created, quorum reached, ZK migration enabled. If taken as annotation value it would make the state machine transition from `WaitControllersInMigration` to `WaitBrokersInMigration`. We could assume it as the `PRE_MIGRATION` in the Kafka codebase.
* `migration`: the Kafka meaning is migration done and controllers in "dual write". Of course, taken as annotation value it would mean "start the migration" (not migration already done), so moving from `WaitBrokersInMigration` to `DualWrite/WaitBrokersOutMigration` through the ephemeral `Migration` state. The final `DualWrite/WaitBrokersOutMigration` would match the `MIGRATION` meaning in the Kafka codebase.
* `post-migration`: the Kafka meaning is migration completed. Used as annotation value it would make the transition from `DualWrite/WaitBrokersOutMigration` to `WaitControllersOutMigration` and from this one to `FullKRaft`. The last `FullKRaft` would have the same meaning as the `POST_MIGRATION` in the Kafka codebase. Remember that at this point we need to delete ZooKeeper which I think is not part of the `POST_MIGRATION` meaning.

Finally, I think that the `pre-migration` could also replace `zk` to rollback the migration process where possible (as per the diagram). It doesn't have a conflict with the `pre-migration` used to move forward at the beginning of the process.

@fvaleri do you find the above description accurate and what you had in mind? If yes, I can change to use those annotation values but not representing the "state" but still the "direction", the "desire", the "next move" in the migration process. I.e. `pre-migration` = move to be ready for migration with controllers running and quorum formed connected to ZK, `migration` = run the migration by configuring brokers for ZK migration, `post-migration` = finilize the migration exiting controllers first and brokers later to be connected to ZK. Use `pre-migration` = come back to controllers running, quorum formed, connected to ZK but brokers back to use ZK.

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Reviewer 4: I think we agree on the 3 migration states/directions. I see the annotation's value as the desired state, which you can also read as the direction in which we are going to reconcile. Both interpretations are fine for me.

If we also consider @scholzj suggestion of using just one annotation on the Kafka resource, the migration process would be much simpler from the administrator perspective.

1. **kraf-migration: pre-migration**: Wait for the dedicated controller and broker pools for this cluster, without doing any rolling update.
2. **kraf-migration: migration**: Trigger the controller and broker pool migration configuration changes, and do the 1st rolling update (controller first, then brokers). This starts the cluster metadata migration, with the active controller running in dual-write mode (rollback is still possible).
3. **kraf-migration: post-migration**: As soon as the metadata migration is completed, finalize by removing the migration configuration from all pools, and doing the 2nd rolling update (rollback is not possible).

Internally, the FSM will have more states to handle the migration steps ordering (this ius as you designed). Both controller and broker migration settings can be applied automatically by the Cluster Operator once the pools are ready, but we need to roll controller first and then brokers.

When the administrator removes the Kafka annotation, and we are not in `post-migration` state, the Cluster Operator will revert back to `pre-migration` state by following the reverse path, otherwise nothing will happen. 

When in `post-migration` state, ZooKeeper is not used anymore, so the administrator will be able to safely remove its configuration from the Kafka resource, which will terminate all related pods.

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Author: Using just `Kafka` was my first brainstormed idea but I put it aside to give more fine control to the user on the node pools (because anyway it's a matter of configuring & rolling the nodes in different pools at different times).
My thought was also having more user involved because this process will be temporary so removed in the future when all Kafka cluster will be migrated to KRaft.
Anyway the current solution could have its challenges, let me try to get back what I had before by also using some of your feedback.

> kraf-migration: pre-migration: Wait for the dedicated controller and broker pools for this cluster, without doing any rolling update.

Actually here we are waiting only for dedicated controllers which need to be configured with ZK migration enabled already. We are not waiting for broker pools. Brokers are already running using ZK and are already part of a pool. Applying `kraf-migration: pre-migration` would just mean moving to `WaitControllersInMigration` to wait the user creating the `KafkaNodePool` for controllers. When the pool is created, controllers are rolled and finally we move in `WaitBrokersInMigration`. We are still in an overall PRE_MIGRATION state (as per Kafka codebase).

> kraf-migration: migration: Trigger the 1st rolling update (controllers first, then brokers). This starts the cluster metadata migration, with the active controller running in dual-write mode (rollback is still possible).

Related to the previous point you don't need to roll controllers. When deployed they are already configured by the operator with ZK migration enabled. Applying `kraft-migration: migration` would mean configure brokers with ZK migration enabled (also connected to controllers), rolling them ... this would start the actual migration (when brokers join the controllers) so moving to `Migration` and then `DualWrite` state. We would be in an overall MIGRATION state (as per Kafka codebase). From here user can rollback to apply `kraf-migration: pre-migration` again (back to the `WaitBrokersInMigration`).

> kraf-migration: post-migration: As soon as the metadata migration is completed, finalize by removing the migration configuration from all pools, and doing the 2nd rolling update (rollback is not possible).

At this point, with this approach we are missing a potential point of rollback. My proposal has the user involved to move brokers out first and then controllers. When brokers are out (we moved to `WaitControllersOutMigration`) we can still rollback. While with this "new" approach the rollback is possible only in the `DualWrite`. Applying the `kraf-migration: post-migration` would mean moving brokers out of migration then controllers as well, all in one transition. Migration ends with the `FullKRaft` state. We are in the overall POST_MIGRATION state (as per Kafka codebase).

> When in post-migration state, ZooKeeper is not used anymore, so the administrator will be able to safely remove its configuration from the Kafka resource, which will terminate all related pods.

Currently it's not possible to remove the `Kafka.spec.zookeeper` field but we would need something like this to proceed with the ZooKeeper pods deletion.

Let me draw a new FSM I will post here before moving to have it in the proposal.

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Author: Here a new FSM ...

![zk-kraft-migration-fsm](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/assets/5842311/4efdf523-428a-4744-9a2c-ff7b683067ae)

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Reviewer 4: LGTM. Thanks.

> * `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`: to be applied on the `KafkaNodePool`(s) custom resource with `dual|kraft|zk` values to represent the the desired "direction" in the migration process by the user:

Author: Proposal updated. I moved the previous FSM to the rejected alternatives.

  * `dual`: allows to move the migration process forward to reach the point of the "dual-write" with KRaft controllers deployed but with metadata written to both ZooKeeper and KRaft. Brokers are also connected to both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers.
  * `kraft`: allows to move the migration process forward from the "dual-write" to the end of the migration with ZooKeeper out of the picture.

>   * `zk`: allows to move the migration process back, when still possible, to have brokers working again with ZooKeeper ensemble only.

Reviewer: It is super weird to have one annotation with completely different semantics (values). I would pick different annotations if they are really needed on both types of resources.

Author: Fede raised the same point but as I said that was an open point I had to change this annotation name. I am fine to go with `run-kraft-migration` (as suggested by Fede) for now.

The state machine is described in the following diagram:

![Migration Finite State Machine](./images/056-zk-kraft-migration-fsm.png)

The following sections explain the states and transitions in details.

#### Phase 1: Provisioning the KRaft controller quorum

Starting from a `NoMigration` (or null) state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field), the user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: true` on the `Kafka` custom resource to make the operator aware of the migration "intention".
The FSM moves to a `WaitControllersInMigration` state where the operator expects the user to create the KRaft controllers pool.
The user creates the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource containing the definition of the KRaft controllers which are going to replace the ZooKeeper nodes.

> These controllers needed to be deployed in "migration mode", so the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource has to be annotate with `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: dual`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These controllers needed to be deployed in "migration mode", so the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource has to be annotated with `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: dual`.
```

This way, the operator configures the controllers accordingly with the ZooKeeper migration flag and the connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble. 

```shell
# Enable the migration
zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# ZooKeeper client configuration
zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>
```

> > NOTE: without an annotation to differentiate the operator behavior, the operator itself just creates the controller nodes in the pool and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata).

Author: My intention here was just reporting what's happening today.
Should we consider this as an issue today, so the need to address it which would take this out from the proposal?
Or maybe, if your current cluster has pools with only `broker` roles and no `controller`(s) pools we should detect the creation of a pool of controllers as an error if the migration is not set to be started. @scholzj any thoughts on this?

> > NOTE: without an annotation to differentiate the operator behavior, the operator itself just creates the controller nodes in the pool and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata).

Reviewer: Sorry, I don't follow the discussion. So I do not have any thoughts I'm afraid.

> > NOTE: without an annotation to differentiate the operator behavior, the operator itself just creates the controller nodes in the pool and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata).

Reviewer 4: I tried this scenario, and effectively the KRaft active controller takes over, and loads the existing metadata from ZK. No data loss.

```sh
2023-09-12 09:04:32,385 INFO [QuorumController id=5] Loaded ZK migration state of NONE (org.apache.kafka.controller.QuorumController) [quorum-controller-5-event-handler]
```

The problem is that the active controller is not in dual-write mode, so rollback to ZK controller is not possible anymore. We need to avoid this state for the migration, the contoller NodePool must be created only when the pre-migration annotation has been set, which means that we will include the migration configurations.

> > NOTE: without an annotation to differentiate the operator behavior, the operator itself just creates the controller nodes in the pool and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata).

Author: Let's move the discussion out of the migration proposal. I opened the following issue on the operator https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9108

> The KRaft controllers should also be provisioned with the same cluster ID as the existing Kafka cluster.

Author: While this is anyway something mentioned in the Kafka migration guide, it's already enforced and guaranteed by the operator. I will remove this sentence because doesn't add any value here.

> The operator has to wait for the KRaft controllers quorum to be formed, leader elected and the migration process moving into the state of waiting for brokers to register.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The operator has to wait for the KRaft controllers quorum to be formed, leader elected and the migration process moved into the state of waiting for brokers to register.
```

The FSM moves to a `WaitBrokersInMigration` state where the operator expects the user to enable ZooKeeper migration on the brokers pool in order to actually start the migration (Phase 2).

From this state it's still possible to not move forward with the migration.

> The user can deleted the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource containing the definition of the KRaft controllers and apply the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: false` annotation (or delete it) on the `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The user can delete the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource containing the definition of the KRaft controllers and apply the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: false` annotation (or delete it) on the `Kafka` custom resource.
```

The FSM moves back to the `NoMigration` state (or null) actually exiting from the migration process.

#### Phase 2: Enabling the migration on the brokers

In the `WaitBrokersInMigration` state, the operator expects the user to enable ZooKeeper migration on the brokers pool in order to actually start the migration.

> In order to start the actual migration, the brokers needs to be connected to the KRaft controllers and have the ZooKeeper migration enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to start the actual migration, the brokers need to be connected to the KRaft controllers and have the ZooKeeper migration enabled.
```

> The user annotates the `KafkaNodePool` resource running the current ZooKeeper based brokers with `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: dual`.

Reviewer: What if there are more of them? How does this sync? Can half of the brokers run in ne mode and other half in the other one?

Author: Yeah that's a good point which could be simpler to be addressed if everything is driven via the only `Kafka` resource and not each pool. As I said before I am in the process to get back my first idea using just `Kafka` which I didn't share here.

In this case, the operator configures the brokers with no ZooKeeper migration flag, and no KRaft controllers quorum connection information.
Finally, the operator rolls the brokers and wait for them to be ready again.
The FSM moves back to the `WaitBrokersInMigration`, so actually at the end of the Phase 1.

If the user doesn't rollback the migration, next step is to move brokers out of migration and using KRaft only in Phase 3.

#### Phase 3: Migrating brokers to KRaft

In the `DualWrite/WaitBrokersOutMigration` state, the operator expects the user to disable the ZooKeeper migration on the brokers pool.
The user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: kraft` annotation to the `KafkaNodePool` resource running the current ZooKeeper based brokers.
The operator updates the brokers' configuration by removing the ZooKeeper migration flag and connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble.
It also has to replace the `broker.id` with `node.id` and add `process.roles=broker`.

```shell
# replace broker.id with node.id and add process.roles=broker

> process.roles=broker

Reviewer: IIRC this is already there

The Strimzi Cluster Operator would allow the user to drive the migration process across multiple phases in a semi-automatic procedure.

## Current situation

Currently, the Strimzi Cluster Operator supports the deployment of KRaft-based Apache Kafka clusters only from scratch.
The KRaft support is still behind a `UseKraft` feature gate which also needs the `KafkaNodePools` one to work correctly.
Through the usage of one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources, alongside the main `Kafka` one, the user is able to define pools of brokers and KRaft controllers, taking ZooKeeper out of the picture.

It is not possible to migrate a ZooKeeper-based Apache Kafka cluster to be KRaft based.
If the user has an already deployed Apache Kafka cluster using a ZooKeeper ensemble for storing metadata, the Strimzi Cluster Operator has no support to migrate the running cluster to use a pool of KRaft controllers replacing the ZooKeeper nodes for the same purpose.

There is also no support to upgrade a KRaft-based Apache Kafka cluster to a newer version, but this missing piece is out of the scope for this proposal.

> Furthermore, if the user creates one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources to deploy KRaft controllers, the operator itself just creates the controller nodes and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata). Because of KRaft and related migration from ZooKeeper not supported yet, this can drive to the following [issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9108).

Reviewer 4: leads?

> Furthermore, if the user creates one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources to deploy KRaft controllers, the operator itself just creates the controller nodes and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata). Because of KRaft and related migration from ZooKeeper not supported yet, this can drive to the following [issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9108).

Author: Yeah I think he meant leads :-)

 
* `pre-migration`: used at the very beginning of the migration process, it represents the intention to move into the phase where operator is waiting for the user to create the KRaft controllers pool in order to deploy the corresponding nodes with the ZooKeeper migration enabled. This value can be also used to rollback the migration progress, when still possible, to have brokers working again with ZooKeeper ensemble only.
* `migration`: to move the migration process forward with brokers configured with the ZooKeeper migration enabled and connected to the KRaft controllers, so that Apache Kafka migration component can run the actual metadata migration ending with the "dual write" mode where metadata are both written to ZooKeeper and KRaft. Brokers are also connected to both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers.
* `post-migration`: to finalize the migration by disabling the ZooKeeper migration on controllers and brokers, rolling the nodes, and finally having a full KRaft based cluster with ZooKeeper ensemble still running but out of the picture.

The state machine is described in the following diagram:

> ![Migration Finite State Machine](./images/056-zk-kraft-migration-fsm.png)

Reviewer 5: This diagram is excellent. Giving it a legend/annotations, so we know what the colours and text styles mean would make it even better.

Author: Good point, I will improve it!

Author: I added a legend at the bottom, let me know what you think ;-)

Reviewer 4: Much better IMO.

#### Phase 2: Enabling the migration on the brokers

In the `WaitBrokersInMigration` state, the operator expects the user to ask for running the actual metadata migration.
In order to start the actual migration, the brokers need to be connected to the KRaft controllers and have the ZooKeeper migration enabled.
The user annotates the `Kafka` custom resource running the current ZooKeeper based brokers with `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: migration`.
This annotation drives the operator to update the brokers' configuration with the ZooKeeper migration flag enabled and with the new KRaft controllers quorum connection information as well.

```shell
# KRaft controller quorum configuration
controller.quorum.voters=<voters>
controller.listener.names=CONTROLLER

# The controller.listener.name should also be added to listener.security.property.map
listener.security.protocol.map=PLAINTEXT:PLAINTEXT,CONTROLLER:PLAINTEXT

# Enable the migration
zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# ZooKeeper client configuration
zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>
```

Finally, the operator rolls the brokers.

> After the rolling, the internal Apache Kafka migration component starts the actual metadata migration and the operator has to wait for it to be completed to move to the next phase.

Reviewer 4: My understanding is that this process is async. After the last broker restarts, the active controller gets the broker registration with the migration flag enabled, and it starts the actual metadata migration from ZK. After that, it starts working in dual-write mode.

> After the rolling, the internal Apache Kafka migration component starts the actual metadata migration and the operator has to wait for it to be completed to move to the next phase.

Author: Yeah that's how Fede explained. The reconciliation ends with brokers restarting. When they are ready again, they are connected to the KRaft controllers and because the ZooKeeper migration flag is enabled, Kafka starts the migration. The operator can get info/updates update the process querying the Kafka Agent endpoint I am envisioning for getting metrics about migration. Of course, it happens on each reconciliation cycle, until migration ends, the FSM moves to the next state (dual write) waiting for next action from the user.

Finally, the operator rolls the brokers and wait for them to be ready again.
The FSM moves back to the `WaitBrokersInMigration`, so actually at the beginning of the Phase 2.

If the user doesn't rollback the migration, next step is to move brokers and controllers out of migration and using KRaft only in Phase 3/4.

#### Phase 3/4: Migrating brokers and controllers to full KRaft

In the `DualWrite` state, the operator expects the user desire to finalize the migration, having a full KRaft based cluster and ZooKeeper out of the picture.
The user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: post-migration` annotation to the `Kafka` custom resource.
The operator updates the brokers' configuration by removing the ZooKeeper migration flag and connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble.
It also has to replace the `broker.id` with `node.id`.

```shell
# replace broker.id with node.id
node.id=0

# Remove the migration enabled flag
# zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# Remove ZooKeeper client configuration
# zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>

# Don't set the IBP, KRaft uses "metadata.version" feature flag
# inter.broker.protocol.version=3.5
```

> The operator rolls the brokers and waits for them to be ready again.

Reviewer 5: You've said "rolls the broker" several times so far. Is it always just the brokers, and not the controllers that are restarted? It might be a good idea to be explicit in each case, just so its clear to the reader.

Author: In this case it's right. After being in "Dual Write" state, the first nodes to move out from the ZooKeeper usage are the brokers. If you follow the next step, then the controllers are rolled to move out from ZooKeeper usage and finalizing the migration. Everything should happen in the same reconcile loop. As you can see the section title is Phase 3/4. The first rejected proposal was envisaging two different steps: user getting out controllers first and still user acting for getting out brokers then. With this updated proposal is just one action/step for running both phases.

They are now disconnected from the ZooKeeper ensemble which is totally out of the picture.
The FSM moves to the `FullKRaft` state and ZooKeeper is not used anymore.

Before completing the migration, the `DualWrite` state is also the last opportunity for the user to rollback the migration process by applying the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: pre-migration` on the `Kafka` custom resource.
In this case, the operator configures the brokers with no ZooKeeper migration flag, and no KRaft controllers quorum connection information.
Finally, the operator rolls the brokers and wait for them to be ready again.
The FSM moves back to the `WaitBrokersInMigration`, so actually at the beginning of the Phase 2.

#### Phase 5: Removing ZooKeeper

At this point the ZooKeeper ensemble is out of the picture, still running but not used anymore.
In the `FullKRaft` state, the operator expects the user to finalize the migration by removing ZooKeeper.
The user removes the `spec.zookeeper` on the `Kafka` custom resource so that the operator can delete the ZooKeeper nodes.
The FSM moves back to a `NoMigration` state (or null) and the operator upgrades `Kafka.status.migrationState` field accordingly.

> 

Reviewer 5: Overall the descriptions of the phases make sense, but I think they could be written in a more structured way which would make it more easily understood. 

Each phase could be described using the same template. You could use subsections, or start each paragraph with bold. 
1. The **triggering action** (usually this is the user changing the annotation). 
2. A number of paragraph covering all the **preconditions** that are verified before actions by the operator, and what happens if they're violated. This might include the current state of the migration in the Kafka CR, for example.
3. The **actions** that the operator does (if the preconditions were met), along with things which might be observable during the actions (e.g. changes to Kafka metrics) 
4. The Kafka CR **status changes** that the operator makes when the action is completed (successfully and unsuccessfully).

 You're also to entirely clear with things like `WaitBrokersInMigration` whether these are CR states, or merely states which exist within Kafka itself.

Author: > Each phase could be described using the same template.

I think this is a really great idea. It could make everything more structured and understandable. I will work on it.

> You're also to entirely clear with things like `WaitBrokersInMigration` whether these are CR states, or merely states which exist within Kafka itself.

These are states in the migration FSM, so states of the `KRaftMigrationManager` which will be a component within the operator. These states are persisted into the `Kafka.status.migrationState` field.

Author: I updated both the FSM graph and the proposal making each phase more structured.
Only doubt is that I just used a divider when in a phase you can have a different transitions across the graph (because different preconditions, triggers).

### Metrics

> During ZooKeeper to KRaft migration, there are some metrics that could be useful to check the status in each of the phases.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
During ZooKeeper to KRaft migration, there are some Kafka metrics that could be useful to check the status in each of the phases.
```

The most interesting and useful ones are:

| MBean                                                             | Description                                                                                                                        |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=MetadataType           | An enumeration of: ZooKeeper (1), KRaft (2), or Dual (3). The active controller reports this.                                      |
| kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=MigratingZkBrokerCount | A count of ZK brokers that are registered with KRaft and ready for migration. This will only be reported by the active controller. |
| kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=ZkMigrationState       | An enumeration of the possible migration states the cluster can be in. This is only reported by the active controller.             |

> They could be used the following way:

Reviewer 5: Proposals are always easier to understand if you take a stance. Either make the case for actually using these things, or mention them as a rejected alternative, or don't mention them at all.

> * `MetadataType`: to understand if the active controller is not in the "dual write" mode anymore (keeping metadata in both ZooKeeper and KRaft) and also out of ZooKeeper, keeping metadata only as KRaft.

Reviewer 5: It's not clear if  these things internal CO state, or expressed in the CR.

Author: Sorry, which "these things"? If you are referring to this list, they are the MBean names from Kafka about migration metrics.

The KRaft support is still behind a `UseKraft` feature gate which also needs the `KafkaNodePools` one to work correctly.
Through the usage of one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources, alongside the main `Kafka` one, the user is able to define pools of brokers and KRaft controllers, taking ZooKeeper out of the picture.

It is not possible to migrate a ZooKeeper-based Apache Kafka cluster to be KRaft based.
If the user has an already deployed Apache Kafka cluster using a ZooKeeper ensemble for storing metadata, the Strimzi Cluster Operator has no support to migrate the running cluster to use a pool of KRaft controllers replacing the ZooKeeper nodes for the same purpose.

There is also no support to upgrade a KRaft-based Apache Kafka cluster to a newer version, but this missing piece is out of the scope for this proposal.

## Motivation

The KRaft mode has been declared to be production-ready since Apache Kafka 3.3 release by the Apache Kafka project. 
Anyway, there are still missing features as reported in the official [documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_missing).

> The ZooKeeper mode has been deprecated in Apache Kafka 3.5 while providing the migration process to KRaft mode as preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ZooKeeper mode has been deprecated after the Apache Kafka 3.5 version was released while providing the migration process to KRaft mode as preview.
```

The upstream Apache Kafka community documentation also provides a [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) guide showing how to run the procedure manually on your cluster.

One of the main points to highlight is that such a process doesn't support migration to a KRaft-based cluster running in "combined" mode:

* Cannot migrate from a ZooKeeper based configuration to a cluster with nodes hosting both controller and broker (so actually reducing the number of nodes by removing the ZooKeeper ones).
* The migration works by having ZooKeeper nodes to be replaced by new KRaft controller nodes.
* Supporting "combined" mode is actually one of the rejected [alternatives](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration#KIP866ZooKeepertoKRaftMigration-CombinedModeMigrationSupport) in KIP-866.

It means that the user environment should be sized to host more nodes running in parallel, because during the migration process both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers will be running.

> The end of the migration will involve shutting down the ZooKeeper nodes reducing the resources consumption.

Reviewer: This is valid. But none of this is really a _proposal_. It is just description of what Kafka allows. Maybe it should have a separate section?

Author: I see your point. I will move in a subsection under "Current situation" and titled "Migration in Apache Kafka project" so that I explain what is the current situation in terms of Strimzi integration and the state of the art in the core Apache Kafka project. Or maybe just straight under "Current situation" with no subsection, right after the status in Strimzi. Wdyt?

### Prerequisites

> An Apache Kafka cluster is running in ZooKeeper mode with `N` brokers and `M` ZooKeeper nodes, as defined by the `replicas` fields in the corresponding `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer: What si the relevance of the number of replicas here? I don't think there is any relationship between number of Zoo nodes and number of controller nodes, or?

The cluster has to be migrated to use `KafkaNodePool`(s) first for running the brokers (ZooKeeper nodes are never part of pools).
Without them it’s not possible to deploy the new KRaft controllers (separated from the current Kafka brokers) as the first step of the migration.
So the prerequisite is to have the Kafka cluster still using ZooKeeper but running the Kafka brokers with `KafkaNodePool`(s).
The user can follow the procedure described [here](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str) in the official documentation, in order to meet this prerequisite.

Before migrating to KRaft, the cluster must be upgraded to Kafka version minimum of 3.5.0 with `inter.broker.protocol.version` set to “3.5”.

> Furthermore, the running Apache Kafka cluster should not be using JBOD because in this case the migration to KRaft is not supported.

Reviewer: Should this be really covered here? I would expect that this has to be addressed in Kafka and should not impact the actual migration.

Author: But do we know if it will be addressed in Kafka before we have the migration process out?
I mean if we are faster, we should have a check to "block" the migration process because JBOD is still not supported otherwise we still have blockers for starting to work on migration when KRaft in Kafka is not ready.
Not starting the work now would be running faster later.

Reviewer: Honestly, I don't know. Kafka is a sh*tshow lately with their post-release deprecations etc. But I think we should focus on how it will look when it is _production-ready_. Also, if you assume it will not be done, do we even want to support KRaft without it? What will we do with the existing users?

Author: > if you assume it will not be done

I didn't say that, or I didn't mean that if you got this way. I assume they will support everything in KRaft at some point but should we wait until that point to start working on the migration? It would be maybe late and we cannot promise to the community to have the migration in no time. It's not trivial, it's a complex task, it will take time to develop and test imho. I would just like trying to start as soon as possible.
I could even not adding the check on JBOD making just the assumption that it works in Kafka ... but what if it doesn't when we are ready with the migration but Kafka is not ready yet (i.e. JBOD fixed)?

Reviewer: Well, as I said, I think you should plan for the final state. I do not think JBOD itself has impact on how the migration will work given the controller nodes will likely not use it anyway, or? So I would simply not cover it in the proposal.

Author: I can remove this sentence. @fvaleri wdyt? You raised the same concern in other comments IIRC.

Reviewer 4: I raised this because JBOD support doesn't seem to be a priority. The KIP is not yet approved. That said, a KRaft only release without JBOD support is unlikely IMO, so we may treat this as an implementation detail, and remove that phrase.

### Migration

The migration process is semi-automatic which means having the user driving the process by interacting with the operator (mostly via annotations and custom resources creation/deletion) which is in charge to do the rest (i.e. nodes re-configuration, rolling, checking migration status, ...).

> > NOTE: this kind of approach is already in place for the Kafka version upgrade.

Reviewer: For upgrades, we have a fully automatic option as well. So this comparison just begs for the request for that.

Author: Well am I wrong or you could have two steps: first upgrade the Kafka version (cluster is rolled) and then, if needed, upgrading inter protocol version, log message format and so on? There is anyway more user interaction then a fully automated procedure. I was referring to this.

Reviewer: No, you can have it completely automated. You just upgrade the operator and it does everything else.

Currently, the operator prints the following warning:

```shell
io.strimzi.operator.common.model.InvalidResourceException: Tha Kafka cluster my-cluster is invalid: [At least one KafkaNodePool with the controller role and at least one replica is required when KRaft mode is enabled]
```

This is because with KRaft mode enabled in the operator, the reconciled `Kafka` resource doesn’t have any controller nodes (in any pool).

The migration process can be also rolled back to ZooKeeper at any point before taking the KRaft controllers out of the migration mode.

### Finite State Machine (FSM)

The migration process can be described with a Finite State Machine (FSM).
The operator has a new `KRaftMigrationManager` component in charge of driving and tracking transitions in the FSM.
Transitioning across the states depends on the current state, stored in the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration-state` annotation on the `Kafka` custom resource, and the "input" represented by the user interaction with the operator through the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration` annotation to be applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.

> 

Reviewer: 1. As I said before, I think you are making the mistake of building this on the current `UseKRaft` feature gate. That is currently written for development and testing only. For taking it further towards production, it will have to evolve and likely have its own annotations. So you are either missing those annotations - or maybe better, you should define and reuse them. I think this heavily impacts anything from this line on.
2. Storing state in the annotation of Kafka CR is not possible. You risk other tooling to take it away from you. You cannot use user managed custom resources to store any annotations.

Author: Sorry but I haven't got what you mean by point 1.

> As I said before, I think you are making the mistake of building this on the current UseKRaft feature gate. That is currently written for development and testing only. For taking it further towards production, it will have to evolve and likely have its own annotations.

What does it mean? We should stop and wait for when Strimzi has a full KRaft support by waiting for when Kafka has the full KRaft support? 

> So you are either missing those annotations - or maybe better, you should define and reuse them. I think this heavily impacts anything from this line on.

There are no annotations related to KRaft AFAIK right now in Strimzi so I am defining the ones I need for this implementation. What's wrong with that?

> Storing state in the annotation of Kafka CR is not possible. You risk other tooling to take it away from you. You cannot use user managed custom resources to store any annotations.

The initial proposal was based on using a field in the `Kafka.status` and you raised the good point that it's a change in the API for a temporary thing so I agreed. The idea I had was using an annotation. I can't think about another way (a totally external resources? i.e. a ConfigMap). What are you proposing? We need to know the state of the migration and persisting it somewhere.

Reviewer: No, I'm not necessarily suggesting you should wait, although that would give us much more clarity obviously. But I do not think there is anything wrong with planning for the future. 

However, I think planning it upfront requires you to predict or design how the future will look like. For example, if you base this on the current state, then you would migrate all clusters managed by a single operator in parallel. I don't think that would work. So you need to figure out how it will actually look like at the time when the migration makes sense. Because I think writing the proposal now based on the current state and rewriting it later because things changed makes little sense.

>The initial proposal was based on using a field in the Kafka.status and you raised the good point that it's a change in the API for a temporary thing so I agreed. The idea I had was using an annotation. I can't think about another way (a totally external resources? i.e. a ConfigMap). What are you proposing? We need to know the state of the migration and persisting it somewhere.

Yeah, well. What should I tell you ... not every reviewer gives you good comments 🤷‍♂️. But I think the comment about the annotation stands -> if you wanna use annotation, you have to place it on resources we manage, not the user as you will easily lose it there. I guess the comment about the status fields stands, but maybe we can live with it as we likely drop it in `v1` APi? I guess it also relates to the comments about how users monitor the steps. For internal things, maybe you can use annotations on something internal. But if users is expected to watch the state, maybe status is the best despite the negative aspects.

Author: > No, I'm not necessarily suggesting you should wait, although that would give us much more clarity obviously. But I do not think there is anything wrong with planning for the future.

However, I think planning it upfront requires you to predict or design how the future will look like. For example, if you base this on the current state, then you would migrate all clusters managed by a single operator in parallel. I don't think that would work. So you need to figure out how it will actually look like at the time when the migration makes sense. Because I think writing the proposal now based on the current state and rewriting it later because things changed makes little sense.

I am confused. This sentences seem to say something and the opposite :-) So I am not sure what should be our plan for migration tbh.

> I guess the comment about the status fields stands, but maybe we can live with it as we likely drop it in v1 APi?

Well I read your previous comment as totally against to use a field in the `status` then I suggested the annotation. These are the only two options we usually have for this kind of things.

> I guess it also relates to the comments about how users monitor the steps. For internal things, maybe you can use annotations on something internal. But if users is expected to watch the state, maybe status is the best despite the negative aspects.

Yeah I left a comment there about checking the annotation based on your negative comment on the `status` field.
Of course, watching an annotation is not that great.

> What should I tell you ... not every reviewer gives you good comments 🤷‍♂️

I think that sometime much clarity is better and proposing an idea can help when commenting.

Reviewer: > Well I read your previous comment as totally against to use a field in the status then I suggested the annotation. These are the only two options we usually have for this kind of things.

Well, sometimes, things are not great but they are still the best option :-/

> I am confused. This sentences seem to say something and the opposite :-) So I am not sure what should be our plan for migration tbh.

From my point of view, I basically think you have two choices -> wait with the proposal until it is clear ... or come up with how it will actually work when it matters. The second option might be best as you would need to control when does what part of the code base take over.

I think the general idea is simple. Latest once the `UseKRaft` FG is ready to move beyond development and testing only (which I guess at minimum needs the rolling updates and liveness / readiness, possibly upgrades), we would need to have some annotation similar to the node pools one to be used when the FG is enabled but only some clusters should use KRaft. And that will change this proposal. I think there is an opportunity to use the same annotation to drive the migration. But if nothing else, the migration process would need adding this annotation at some stage.

Author: > Well, sometimes, things are not great but they are still the best option :-/

I will revert back the usage of the field then which was anyway my preferred option.

> I think the general idea is simple. Latest once the UseKRaft FG is ready to move beyond development and testing only (which I guess at minimum needs the rolling updates and liveness / readiness, possibly upgrades), we would need to have some annotation similar to the node pools one to be used when the FG is enabled but only some clusters should use KRaft. And that will change this proposal. I think there is an opportunity to use the same annotation to drive the migration. But if nothing else, the migration process would need adding this annotation at some stage.

Of course, the migration process needs rolling controllers but it's something that Kate & Tina are already addressing. Something working is already available in their fork so I can anyway start exploring migration using that rolling feature, hoping that their work will be soon in main branch.
Regarding annotations, I guess you are referring to the `strimzi.io/node-pools` one. We don't have KRaft annotations right now and I don't see why I should wait for other annotations to be in place if I can have a dedicated one `strimzi.io/kraft-migration` used for migration purposes. It's just an annotation and when migration won't be useful anymore, the annotation won't be handled anymore. I don't see it as a big problem tbh. It's much better instead of waiting for some other KRaft work being done, adding annotations and then using one of them for migration. It would be just a blocker for this work.

Tbh what I see really a blocker right now is the need for rolling controllers (which is available in some shape in the Kate & Tina fork). The rest of KRaft missing features is not a blocker for the migration itself. They are a blockers for KRaft in GA support from Strimzi, I would agree on this. But waiting for a KRaft ready both in Kafka and Strimzi before starting a migration work would mean postponing this work for months and months.

Also, the `PRE_MIGRATION`, `MIGRATION` and `POST_MIGRATION` dotted boxes correspond to the `ZkMigrationState` [enum values](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/trunk/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/migration/ZkMigrationState.java#L32) from the Apache Kafka migration component.

#### Phase 1: Provisioning the KRaft controller quorum

Starting from a `NoMigration` (or null) state (with the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration-state` annotation missing), the user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: pre-migration` on the `Kafka` custom resource to make the operator aware of the migration intention.
The FSM moves to a `WaitControllersInMigration` state where the operator expects the user to create the KRaft controllers pool.
The user creates the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource containing the definition of the KRaft controllers which are going to replace the ZooKeeper nodes.
The operator creates and configures the controllers accordingly with the ZooKeeper migration flag and the connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble. 

```shell
# Enable the migration
zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# ZooKeeper client configuration
zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>
```

> > NOTE: without an annotation on the `Kafka` custom resource to differentiate the operator behavior, the operator itself just creates the controllers in the pool and restarts the Kafka brokers to use them. ZooKeeper is not used anymore but no proper migration takes place (from ZooKeeper to KRaft metadata). Because of KRaft and related migration from ZooKeeper not supported yet, this can drive to the following [issue](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9108).

Reviewer: This works exactly as designed and I'm not sure what value does it have to list the current limitations which this proposal is actually addressing here. If you want to cover this, you should do it in the current situation section.

Author: Yeah I can even more this in the current situation, if you want. I will do.

The FSM moves to a `WaitBrokersInMigration` state where the operator expects the user to ask for running the actual metadata migration.
It means the operator has to enable the ZooKeeper migration on the brokers pool in order to actually start the migration (Phase 2).

From this state it's still possible to not move forward with the migration.
The user can delete the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource containing the definition of the KRaft controllers and remove the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration` annotation from the `Kafka` custom resource.
The FSM moves back to the `NoMigration` state (or null) actually exiting from the migration process and the operator removes the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration-state` annotation from the `Kafka` custom resource.
There is nothing to do with the brokers which are still configured to work with the ZooKeeper ensemble only.

#### Phase 2: Enabling the migration on the brokers

In the `WaitBrokersInMigration` state, the operator expects the user to ask for running the actual metadata migration.
In order to start the actual migration, the brokers need to be connected to the KRaft controllers and have the ZooKeeper migration enabled.

> The user annotates the `Kafka` custom resource running the current ZooKeeper based brokers with `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: migration`.

Reviewer: How does the user find out?

Author: It should check the migration status stored "somewhere" in the `Kafka` custom resource (see discussion using annotation state vs status field).

Author: After latest change, there is the `Kafka.status.migrationState` the user has to check.

This annotation drives the operator to update the brokers' configuration with the ZooKeeper migration flag enabled and with the new KRaft controllers quorum connection information as well.

```shell
# KRaft controller quorum configuration
controller.quorum.voters=<voters>
controller.listener.names=CONTROLLER

# The controller.listener.name should also be added to listener.security.property.map

> listener.security.protocol.map=PLAINTEXT:PLAINTEXT,CONTROLLER:PLAINTEXT

Reviewer: IIRC the controller listener is not defined in broker configs (its actually forbidden).

Author: > IIRC the controller listener is not defined in broker configs (its actually forbidden).

Sorry where do you mean, Strimzi or Kafka? In Strimzi I currently see that in a KRaft cluster you have `controller.listener.names=CONTROLPLANE-9090` both on brokers and controllers.
On my local environment where I have been testing migration since Kafka 3.4.0 I have `controller.listener.names=CONTROLLER` which is working fine.

Reviewer: The listener name is there. But it is not in the protocol map.

# Enable the migration
zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

> ```

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused about the missing parts. Will the `zookeeper.connect` etc. option be here somewhere or not? Please clarify.

Author: Yes yes, they will be here. I will add the line as for the controllers snippet in the phase 1.

Finally, the operator rolls the brokers.
After the rolling, the internal Apache Kafka migration component starts the actual metadata migration and the operator has to wait for it to be completed to move to the next phase.
Checking the migration progress can be done using some of the exposed migration metrics.
The FSM moves to `Migration` state first, while migration is ongoing, and finally to the `DualWrite` state.
In both states, the user can rollback the process by applying the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: pre-migration` on the `Kafka` custom resource.
In this case, the operator configures the brokers with no ZooKeeper migration flag, and no KRaft controllers quorum connection information.
Finally, the operator rolls the brokers and wait for them to be ready again.

> The FSM moves back to the `WaitBrokersInMigration`, so actually at the beginning of the Phase 2.

Reviewer: Does it mean that from this stage, you cannot go directly to the beginning and just remove the controller nodes?

Author: Well it should be semantically and technically possible. If the user deletes the `KafkaNodePool` for controllers in this state, the operator detects it, can roll brokers to come back using ZooKeeper and revert the migration.
Is this what you meant? Instead of applying the `pre-migration` annotation? Maybe we can leave both approach?

Reviewer: Well, it sounded like you suggest you can move only one step back but say nothing abotu moving two steps back. So I was curious.

Author: Well that was a good point. I was envisaging user to revert back brokers first but not removing controllers yet. Maybe changing his mind and again restarting migration :-)
Anyway we could have both if you like.

If the user doesn't rollback the migration, next step is to move brokers and controllers out of migration and using KRaft only in Phase 3/4.

#### Phase 3/4: Migrating brokers and controllers to full KRaft

In the `DualWrite` state, the operator expects the user desire to finalize the migration, having a full KRaft based cluster and ZooKeeper out of the picture.

> The user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: post-migration` annotation to the `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer: Again, how does the user find out how to do it?

Author: After latest change, there is the `Kafka.status.migrationState` the user has to check.

| kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=MigratingZkBrokerCount | A count of ZK brokers that are registered with KRaft and ready for migration. This will only be reported by the active controller. |
| kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=ZkMigrationState       | An enumeration of the possible migration states the cluster can be in. This is only reported by the active controller.             |

They could be used the following way:

* `MetadataType`: to understand if the active controller is not in the "dual write" mode anymore (keeping metadata in both ZooKeeper and KRaft) and also out of ZooKeeper, keeping metadata only as KRaft.
* `MigratingZkBrokerCount`: to understand when the migration is starting because after creating the KRaft controllers and forming the quorum, they will "wait for brokers" (beginning of Phase 2). It happens when brokers are switched to the migration mode. Having all brokers registered means migration was started/is going to start.
* `ZkMigrationState`: to get the actual status of the migration. More details [here](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/trunk/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/migration/ZkMigrationState.java).

> The Kafka Agent could expose a `/kraft-migration` endpoint providing some of/all the metrics above (in JSON format) which are useful during the automated migration process, in order to allow the operator to understand when a phase is completed and the user can drive to the next one.

Reviewer: Could? Will the operator not use it?

Author: I will change it as "confirmation" to use it :-)

Reviewer 5: Are you still going to change this @ppatierno, because I had the same comment as Jakub.

The possible values for the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration` annotation are `pre-migration|migration|post-migration` to represent the desired "direction" in the migration process:
 
* `pre-migration`: used at the very beginning of the migration process, it represents the intention to move into the phase where operator is waiting for the user to create the KRaft controllers pool in order to deploy the corresponding nodes with the ZooKeeper migration enabled. This value can be also used to rollback the migration progress, when still possible, to have brokers working again with ZooKeeper ensemble only.
* `migration`: to move the migration process forward with brokers configured with the ZooKeeper migration enabled and connected to the KRaft controllers, so that Apache Kafka migration component can run the actual metadata migration ending with the "dual write" mode where metadata are both written to ZooKeeper and KRaft. Brokers are also connected to both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers.

> * `post-migration`: to finalize the migration by disabling the ZooKeeper migration on controllers and brokers, rolling the nodes, and finally having a full KRaft based cluster with ZooKeeper ensemble still running but out of the picture.

Author: It means "not used anymore by brokers (and controllers)" ... I will be more explicit :-)

---

If not rolling back, the user can move forward by deploying the KRaft controllers pool.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `WaitControllersInMigration` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field).

**_Trigger_**

The user creates the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource containing the definition of the KRaft controllers which are going to replace the ZooKeeper nodes.

**_Actions_**

The operator starts a reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, creates and configures the controllers accordingly with the ZooKeeper migration flag and the connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble. 

```shell
# Enable the migration
zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# ZooKeeper client configuration
zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>
```

The operator has to wait for the KRaft controllers being ready, the quorum to be formed and leader elected, then the migration process moves to the state of waiting for brokers to register.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves to a `WaitBrokersInMigration` state where the operator expects the user to ask for running the actual metadata migration.

> #### Phase 2: Rollback or Enabling the migration on the brokers

Author: I am not sure about this. I am using the "Phase X" as defined on the official Apache Kafka migration guide.
Your suggestion ... suggests ... you are cancelling the phase 2 so going away from it and come back to phase 1.
My title is more about "It's the Phase 2, and it's about rolling back the migration (so come back to Phase 1) or starting the actual migration"

> #### Phase 2: Rollback or Enabling the migration on the brokers

Reviewer 5: Fair enough. How you were structuring the sections became more apparent to me the more I read. I'm fine if you keep it as it was.

**_Actions_**

The operator starts a reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, deletes the controllers pods.
There is nothing to do with the brokers which are still configured to work with the ZooKeeper ensemble only.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves back to the `NoMigration` state (or null) actually exiting from the migration process and the operator upgrades `Kafka.status.migrationState` field accordingly.

---

Instead of rolling back, in order to start the actual migration, the brokers need to be connected to the KRaft controllers and have the ZooKeeper migration enabled.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `WaitBrokersInMigration` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field) and the operator expects the user to ask for running the actual metadata migration.

**_Trigger_**

The the user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft-migration: migration` annotation on the `Kafka` custom resource running the current ZooKeeper based brokers.

**_Actions_**

> With the applied annotation, the operator starts a reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, updates the brokers' configuration with the ZooKeeper migration flag enabled and with the new KRaft controllers quorum connection information as well.

Author: Yeah agree. I added a sentence specifying that it's the operator updating the config not the user in all the other similar places as well.

```shell
# Disable the migration
# zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# Remove ZooKeeper client configuration
# zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>
```

Finally, the operator rolls the controllers, via the `KafkaRoller`,  and waits for them to be ready again.
They are now disconnected from the ZooKeeper ensemble which is totally out of the picture.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves to the `FullKRaft` state and ZooKeeper is not used anymore.

#### Phase 5: Removing ZooKeeper

At this point the ZooKeeper ensemble is out of the picture, still running but not used anymore.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `FullKRaft` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field) and the operator expects the user to finalize the migration by removing ZooKeeper.

**_Trigger_**

The user removes the `spec.zookeeper` on the `Kafka` custom resource.

**_Actions_**

The operator starts a reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, deletes the ZooKeeper nodes pods.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

> The FSM moves back to a `NoMigration` state (or null) and the operator upgrades `Kafka.status.migrationState` field accordingly.

Reviewer 4: > With this, the current proposed strimzi.io/kafka-migration annotation could be replaced by strimzi.io/kafka taking the same values pre-migration|migration|post-migration.

I think it is currently named `strimzi.io/kraft-migration`, which better reflects the scope. IMO, the `strimzi.io/kafka` annotation is too generic.

> The FSM moves back to a `NoMigration` state (or null) and the operator upgrades `Kafka.status.migrationState` field accordingly.

Author: Of course I made a typo LOL!
I meant, the current proposed `strimzi.io/kraft-migration `annotation could be replaced by `strimzi.io/kraft` as described in the https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/93
Sorry for the confusion!

> The FSM moves back to a `NoMigration` state (or null) and the operator upgrades `Kafka.status.migrationState` field accordingly.

Reviewer 4: Ok. Having a single annotation is not a big deal, considering we will get rid of it at some point. Users will need to first upgrade to a bridge release, migrate to KRaft, and finally upgrade to target release.

# ZooKeeper to KRaft migration

This proposal is about enabling the Strimzi Cluster Operator to migrate a ZooKeeper-based Apache Kafka cluster to be KRaft-based.
The Strimzi Cluster Operator would allow the user to drive the migration process across multiple phases in a semi-automatic procedure.

## Current situation

Currently, the Strimzi Cluster Operator supports the deployment of KRaft-based Apache Kafka clusters only from scratch.
The KRaft support is still behind a `UseKraft` feature gate which also needs the `KafkaNodePools` one to work correctly.
Through the usage of one or more `KafkaNodePool` custom resources, alongside the main `Kafka` one, the user is able to define pools of brokers and KRaft controllers, and create a fresh cluster that doesn't depend on ZooKeeper.

It is currently not possible to migrate a ZooKeeper-based Apache Kafka cluster to be KRaft-based.

> If the user has an already deployed Apache Kafka cluster using a ZooKeeper ensemble for storing metadata, the Strimzi Cluster Operator has no support to migrate the running cluster to use a pool of KRaft controllers replacing the ZooKeeper nodes for the same purpose.

Author: Yeah totally agree. I will stick with the first shorter one, it's immediate and makes the idea of the current solution. The second one is too much elaborated :-) I was trying to give more details but I think it's not useful.

* No existing node pool(s) which include the `controller` role.
* If the Topic Operator is used, the `UnidirectionalTopicOperator` feature gate has to be enabled since the old Bidirectional Topic Operator does not work in the KRaft mode.
* The `UseKRaft` feature gate should be enabled (explicitly, or via it being beta status).

If the cluster is not configured to use node pools to run brokers, the user can follow the procedure described [here](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/deploying#proc-migrating-clusters-node-pools-str) in the official documentation, in order to meet such a prerequisite.

### Migration

The user controls the process by interacting with the `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` custom resources.
The cluster operator (mostly via annotations and custom resources creation/deletion) performs the necessary operations: node re-configuration, node rolling, checking migration status, etc.
The migration process can be rolled back to ZooKeeper at any point before taking the KRaft controllers out of the migration mode.

### Finite State Machine (FSM)

The migration process can be described with a Finite State Machine (FSM).

> The operator has a new `KRaftMigrationManager` component in charge of driving and tracking transitions in the FSM.

Reviewer: This seems to be the only _implementation detail_. I would be a bit more curious about where and how it is used. But in any case, it seems a but weird to mention the name of some component without any further details. So I would either add more details (what does it do, where is it called, what classes use it and how etc.). Or simply not mention it at all. But in the current state it seems a bit weird as it drops what seems some class name without saying anything more.

Also, the `PRE_MIGRATION`, `MIGRATION` and `POST_MIGRATION` dotted boxes correspond to the `ZkMigrationState` [enum values](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/trunk/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/migration/ZkMigrationState.java#L32) from the Apache Kafka migration component.

In order to make the process clearer as much as possible, each phase is described by:

* _Preconditions_: conditions that should be met (i.e. current state in the migration FSM) in order to have the operator taking actions on a trigger.
* _Trigger_: what makes the operator actions to run only with verified preconditions.
* _Actions_: what the operator does when preconditions are met (i.e. nodes configuration, rolling, ...) together with things that could be observable during actions (i.e. Kafka metrics changes).
* _Status changes_: how the FSM changes status when the actions are completed.

#### Already running KRaft-based clusters

**_Preconditions_**

The Apache Kafka cluster is running in KRaft mode, so the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation is already applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.

> The FSM is in the `KRaft` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field).

Reviewer 5: Perhaps `metadataState`? What doesn't tie it so strongly to this being about the system in which metadata is stored, it's just telling you something about the metadata, which right now we're using for metadata migration states, but in the future we'd have a bit of flexibility. 

We could also perhaps change names of the intermediate states. I don't think they're very obvious to users right now. 

- ControllersInMigration -> EnablingKraftMigration
- Migration -> BuildingKraftMetadataLog
- DualWrite -> KraftDualWriting
- BrokersOutMigration -> FinalizingKraftMigration

I've inserted `Kraft` into each of these suggesions above on the assumption that we had decoupled the name of the field from migration. I'm also not overly attached to the _ing_ being in the names, but it does indicate that the state reflects something that is on-going.

> The FSM is in the `KRaft` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field).

Author: Yeah I should have changed the name already :-(
I will go with `metadataState`, which is pretty clear when no migration is happening with values like `ZooKeeper` (metadata are in ZK) and `KRaft` (metadata are in KRaft controllers) as well as when migration is running.

Regarding the other potential values, isn't it better to have the `KRaft` suffix for all of them (as for the dual write)?

* ControllersInMigration -> KRaftEnablingMigration
* Migration -> KRaftBuildingMetadataLog
* DualWrite -> KRaftDualWriting
* BrokersOutMigration -> KRaftFinalizingMigration

I think it would show immediately that's something related to KRaft.

Just to elaborate a little bit on this so we are on the same page ...

while the controllers are deployed, the state is still `ZooKeeper` which is anyway right because ... it reflects that metadata are still in ZooKeeper (while controllers are deployed by operator). Then we move to `KRaftEnablingMigration` which is more about "we have to enable the KRaft for brokers now, so rolling them".

the same would apply somehow on the finalization phase: while brokers are rolled, the state is still `KRaftDualWriting` which is right because ... it reflects that metadata are still written to both ZK and KRaft (while brokers are rolling). Then we move to `KRaftFinalizingMigration` which is more about "we have to remove controllers from using ZK, so rolling them".

Of course, it should clearly explained in the doc to provide the user a way to interpret the states.

**_Preconditions_**

The `strimzi.io/kraft: disabled` annotation is already applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.
The FSM is in the `ControllersInMigration` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field) and keep staying in this state until the user deletes the controllers pool(s) to rollback (or re-apply `strimzi.io/kraft: migration` to move forward with migration).

**_Trigger_**

The user deletes the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource(s) defining the controllers already running with ZooKeeper migration enabled.

**_Actions_**

In this case, the operator starts a reconciliation an deletes the pods running the controllers.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves back to the `ZooKeeper`, so actually at the beginning of the Phase 1.
There is no more migration in progress and the Apache Kafka cluster is running in ZooKeeper mode.

> #### Phase 3/4: Migrating brokers and controllers to full KRaft

Reviewer: In the titles you have `Phase 1/2` and `Phase 3/4` => I would read it as _phase 1 out of 2_ and _phase 3 out of 4_. But that does not make sense. Should we rename it? Either just call it phase 1 and 2, or `Phase 1 and 2` and `Phase 3 and 4`?

Author: Yeah, agree.

The upstream Apache Kafka community documentation also provides a [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) guide showing how to run the procedure manually on your cluster not deployed via the Strimzi Cluster Operator.

One of the main points to highlight is that such a process doesn't support migration to a KRaft-based cluster running in "combined" mode:

* Cannot migrate from a ZooKeeper based configuration to a cluster with nodes hosting both controller and broker (so actually reducing the number of nodes by removing the ZooKeeper ones).
* The migration works by having ZooKeeper nodes to be replaced by new KRaft controller nodes.
* Supporting "combined" mode is actually one of the rejected [alternatives](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration#KIP866ZooKeepertoKRaftMigration-CombinedModeMigrationSupport) in KIP-866.

It means that the user environment should be sized to host more nodes running in parallel, because during the migration process both ZooKeeper nodes and KRaft controllers will be running.

> The end of the migration will involve shutting down the ZooKeeper nodes reducing the resources consumption.

Reviewer: Should we add that users should be able to migrate to combined nodes afterward once the KRaft migration is finished?

Author: But it's not a goal for this proposal, or?

Author: Ok, I will add it.

## Motivation

The KRaft mode has been declared to be production-ready since Apache Kafka 3.3 release by the Apache Kafka project. 
Anyway, there are still missing features as reported in the official [documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_missing).
The ZooKeeper mode has been deprecated after the Apache Kafka 3.5 version was released while providing the migration process to KRaft mode as preview.

> The coming Apache Kafka 3.6 release will have such a migration process supported as GA and the ZooKeeper mode will be supported until Apache Kafka 3.7 (January 2024) but removed after that.

Reviewer: Is the 3.7 as the last 3.x release really set somewhere in Apache Kafka? Or is that some year old plan?

Author: I am following this plan which I linked in the proposal as well. https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-833:+Mark+KRaft+as+Production+Ready
If it's old, stale and not used anymore I don't know. That could be more a question for Kafka committers but having  a plan in the proposal sounds to be good to me.

Reviewer: I'm not sure KIP from May 2022 and modified at will afterward is up to date.

Author: This is the only source I have unless pinging the Kafka community and ask if it's still the plan and if not the KIP should be made obsolete and a new one should be opened with new plan. Not sure how it works there.
@tombentley @mimaison @showuon any thoughts?

Reviewer: I guess you can leave the specifics out unless relying on unreliable sources. That was really my intent here.

Reviewer 5: Where anyone has doubt about whether a KIP is out of date wrt the current state of Kafka it would help the Kafka community to ask on the users@ or dev@ mailing lists. That way the committers involved most closely with the actual implementation are able to comment authoritatively and the answer is of the widest benefit to other users contributors. We can follow up with JIRAs to improve the Kafka documentation from there. 

While the KIP might be stale, I think it's helpful to the reader of this Proposal to provide it as context.

Author: I took a look to the page history of KIP-833 and it seems that the latest update related to dates was on April 2023 (this is the [diff](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/pages/diffpagesbyversion.action?pageId=211882739&selectedPageVersions=17&selectedPageVersions=14) you get).
So it's status is not from May 2022 anymore. Of course, we are in September and we could ask to the community if this 5 months old plan is still valid otherwise the KIP should be updated again.
Regarding this proposal, I am leaving the plan as it's described but taken the dates out as suggested.

> Starting from Apache Kafka 4.0 (April 2024) only KRaft mode will be supported.

Reviewer: I guess the same as above. I would avoid any timelines unless it is absolutely obvious that it is the current Kafka plan.

Author: Ditto as above, I linked the Kafka plan from KIP-833.

Reviewer 5: I agree we should keep dates out of this proposal. Dates are subject to change, but they don't impact what we're proposing to do to support ZK -> Kraft migration.

Based on the above Apache Kafka community plan, more details in [KIP-833](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-833%3A+Mark+KRaft+as+Production+Ready), the Strimzi project needs to be prepared to allow users to migrate their current clusters from running in ZooKeeper mode to KRaft mode.

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

In order to start the ZooKeeper to KRaft migration, the following prerequisites should be met:

* A Strimzi-managed Apache Kafka cluster running in ZooKeeper mode.
* Running at Kafka 3.5.0 or higher and with `inter.broker.protocol.version` set to 3.5 or higher.
* Configured to use one or more node pools, with `KafkaNodePool` custom resources, all with the `broker` role.
* No existing node pool(s) which include the `controller` role.

> * The Unidirectional Topic Operator has to be configured, or not used at all, as the previous Bidirectional doesn't work in KRaft mode.

Reviewer: I think the current formulation is a bit confusing. Maybe this would be more clear?

```suggestion
* If the Topic Operator is used, the `UnidirectionalTopicOperator` feature gate has to be enabled since the old Bidirectional Topic Operator does not work in the KRaft mode.
```

> * Either KRaft mode is opted into (using the `+UseKRaft` feature gate), or the `+UseKRaft` feature gate has reached beta level and defaults to enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `UseKRaft` feature gate should be enabled.
```

Author: This was suggested by @tombentley ... I would like to have his opinion on this change.

Reviewer: Well, this says the same without the need to think in conditionals (enabled by default is still enabled). So I assume this is better ;-).

Reviewer 5: How about this, which is less wordy than the original, but more explicit than Jakub's suggestion (which assumes the reader has knowledge of feature gate progression).

```suggestion
* The `UseKRaft` feature gate should be enabled (explictly, or via it being beta status).
```

Author: Yeah I think being more explicit helps readers.

Also, the `PRE_MIGRATION`, `MIGRATION` and `POST_MIGRATION` dotted boxes correspond to the `ZkMigrationState` [enum values](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/trunk/metadata/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/metadata/migration/ZkMigrationState.java#L32) from the Apache Kafka migration component.

In order to make the process clearer as much as possible, each phase is described by:

* _Preconditions_: conditions that should be met (i.e. current state in the migration FSM) in order to have the operator taking actions on a trigger.
* _Trigger_: what makes the operator actions to run only with verified preconditions.
* _Actions_: what the operator does when preconditions are met (i.e. nodes configuration, rolling, ...) together with things that could be observable during actions (i.e. Kafka metrics changes).
* _Status changes_: how the FSM changes status when the actions are completed.

#### Already running KRaft-based clusters

**_Preconditions_**

The Apache Kafka cluster is running in KRaft mode, so the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation is already applied on the `Kafka` custom resource.
The FSM is in the `None` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field).

**_Trigger_**

> The user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft: pre-migration` annotation on the `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer: How do you track the pre-condition / condition? Clearly, `strimzi.io/kraft` cannot have two states at the same time. So how do you evaluate this?

Author: It depends on the state of the FSM. The transition is defined by the current state + the input which is the value changed on the `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation.
In this specific case, on first reconcile with the new operator version, the presence of `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` will move the state into `None`. From there the FSM transitions are well defined (see the diagram).

Reviewer: So, I assume the precondition should not mention the annotation in that case as it is confusing when you talk about checking something that will not be there anymore. the `None` and `Nomigration` states seem also quite confusing. Should they be `ZooKeeper` and `KRaft` instead to make it more understandable?

Author: > So, I assume the precondition should not mention the annotation in that case as it is confusing when you talk about checking something that will not be there anymore.

Why? The precondition highlights what should be the value of the annotation which will change due to the trigger, but the annotation value is part of the initial state of the FSM. 

> the None and Nomigration states seem also quite confusing. Should they be ZooKeeper and KRaft instead to make it more understandable?

Yeah I think these names could be have more sense. Only thing is about the `FullKRaft` we have right now before removing ZooKeeper. It could be named something else, or if we decide to go with more automation (something I am not sure right now tbh) it could just be removed.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves to the `WaitControllersInMigration` state where the operator expects the user to create the KRaft controllers pool.

#### Phase 1: Provisioning the KRaft controller quorum

At the beginning of this phase, it's still possible to back out of the migration.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `WaitControllersInMigration` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field).

**_Trigger_**

The user sets the `strimzi.io/kraft: disabled` annotation on the `Kafka` custom resource.

**_Actions_**

The operator starts a reconciliation but there are no actual actions to be executed.
The `KRaftMigrationManager` component just comes back to idle, with an internal status change.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves back to the `NoMigration` state (or null) actually exiting from the migration process and the operator upgrades `Kafka.status.migrationState` field accordingly.

---

If not rolling back, the user can move forward by deploying the KRaft controllers pool.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `WaitControllersInMigration` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field).

**_Trigger_**

> The user creates the `KafkaNodePool` custom resource containing the definition of the KRaft controllers which are going to replace the ZooKeeper nodes.

Reviewer: What if the node pool already exists when the user sets the `pre-migration` annotation?

Author: Isn't it the case of the issue I opened but you said it's not how it should be used? So use will just screw up because what happens is described here: https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/issues/9108

Reviewer: This goes more to the automation point. I expect many users when presented with it like this to take the shortcut and do both steps in one.

Author: Actually it should be solved by https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/93

The user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft: post-migration` annotation to the `Kafka` custom resource.

**_Actions_**

The operator starts a reconciliation and, via the `KafkaReconciler` component, updates the brokers' configuration by removing the ZooKeeper migration flag and connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble.
It also has to replace the `broker.id` with `node.id`.
More specifically, the brokers are automatically updated with the following configuration (the user cannot set them manually).

```shell
# replace broker.id with node.id
node.id=0

# Remove the migration enabled flag
# zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# Remove ZooKeeper client configuration
# zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>

# Don't set the IBP, KRaft uses "metadata.version" feature flag
# inter.broker.protocol.version=3.5
```

The operator rolls the brokers, via the `KafkaRoller`, and waits for them to be ready again.
They are now connected to the KRaft controllers quorum only and not to the ZooKeeper ensemble anymore.

When brokers are rolled and ready again, the operator updates the controllers' configuration by removing the ZooKeeper migration flag and connection to the ZooKeeper ensemble.

> More specifically, the controllers are automatically updated with the following configuration (the user cannot set them manually).

Reviewer: Does it have to follow this order? That makes it dependent on KafkaRoller I guess. Should there be two internal states instead? First one to remove Zoo from brokers and second to remve Zoo from controllers?

Author: Yes this is the order as per official Kafka procedure.
At the beginning the FSM had a state in the middle as you are suggesting but I thought that it was not necessary.
Isn't the KafkaRoller able to roll brokers first and controllers then all in one reconcile?

Reviewer: Well, I guess what the reconciler will do depends on the other proposal. This is why I raised it here because you are relying on something that is also a work in progress.

Also, to be clear -> I do not care if the state machine has 1 or 20 states. The way you move between the states - requiring the user to approve - is what worries me. So the thought here in this comment was to first roll the brokers, move the state and in next recon roll the controllers. But without any user interaction.

Author: > Well, I guess what the reconciler will do depends on the other proposal. This is why I raised it here because you are relying on something that is also a work in progress.

Just to be sure are you referring to the "KRaft Support in Kafka Roller" proposal?

Reviewer: Yes.

```shell
# Disable the migration
# zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true

# Remove ZooKeeper client configuration
# zookeeper.connect=<connection-to-zookeeper>
```

Finally, the operator rolls the controllers, via the `KafkaRoller`, and waits for them to be ready again.
They are now disconnected from the ZooKeeper ensemble which remain running but are no longer the source of truth for Kafka metadata.
The current reconciliation ends.

**_Status changes_**

The FSM moves to the `FullKRaft` state and ZooKeeper is not used anymore.

#### Phase 5: Removing ZooKeeper

At this point the ZooKeeper ensemble is out of the picture, still running but not used anymore.

**_Preconditions_**

The FSM is in the `FullKRaft` state (as per `Kafka.status.migrationState` field) and the operator expects the user to finalize the migration by removing ZooKeeper.

**_Trigger_**

> The user applies the `strimzi.io/kraft: post-migration` annotation and removes the `spec.zookeeper` on the `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer: Should this be `enabled`? `post-migration` is already in the previous step as trigger.

### Metrics

During ZooKeeper to KRaft migration, there are some Kafka metrics that could be useful to check the status in each of the phases.
More details in the [“Metrics”](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-866+ZooKeeper+to+KRaft+Migration#KIP866ZooKeepertoKRaftMigration-Metrics) section of KIP-866.

The most interesting and useful ones are:

| MBean                                                             | Description                                                                                                                        |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=MetadataType           | An enumeration of: ZooKeeper (1), KRaft (2), or Dual (3). The active controller reports this.                                      |
| kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=MigratingZkBrokerCount | A count of ZK brokers that are registered with KRaft and ready for migration. This will only be reported by the active controller. |

> | kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=ZkMigrationState       | An enumeration of the possible migration states the cluster can be in. This is only reported by the active controller.             |

Reviewer 6: I think this is also an important metric to monitor when users decided to rollback to ZK mode. They need to make sure there's no lag between ZK and KRaft metadata, to avoid data lose after rollback.

`kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=ZkWriteBehindLag`. 

`The amount of lag in records that ZooKeeper is behind relative to the highest committed record in the metadata log. This metric will only be reported by the active KRaft controller.`

Author: This is a good point ...
Is it possible for this metric to be 0? Because I would assume that avoiding data loss means all metadata records in KRaft are written to ZooKeeper as well (while in "dual write" mode). It would assume that in order to rollback, the user should not use the cluster for administrative operations which impact on metadata otherwise this lag will keep being not 0. Is my assumption right?

At FSM level, my thought is that in all the states where rollback is possible, an additional precondition is that `ZkWriteBehindLag` is 0. If it's not, the user should be warned in the `Kafka` resource state and the operator would try again on the next reconciliation.

Reviewer 6: > Is it possible for this metric to be 0? 

Yes, it will be 0 if no lag between ZK/KRaft.

>  It would assume that in order to rollback, the user should not use the cluster for administrative operations which impact on metadata otherwise this lag will keep being not 0. Is my assumption right?

Yes, that's the best practice to avoid potential data loss.

> At FSM level, my thought is that in all the states where rollback is possible, an additional precondition is that ZkWriteBehindLag is 0. If it's not, the user should be warned in the Kafka resource state and the operator would try again on the next reconciliation.

Yes, make sense.

Author: @showuon thinking more about this ... I was wondering if, instead of using this metric as a precondition, we just set a warning in the `Kafka` resource status when it's not 0. I mean, what if the user wants anyway rolls back accepting metadata loss?

Reviewer 6: Fine with me, as long as we explain clearly in the proposal and log it.

Author: Done.
